Natural Language Processing:

A Field of AI that allows computer to understand, interpret and generate human language data.

Techniques involved:
1. Statistics
2. Machine learning
3. Deep learning

By using NLP Techniques:
1. Save massive amounts of time working with text data.
2. Uncover insights that previously might have not been uncovered.

Supervised vs Unsupervised NLP:

Supervised:
Training an algorithm to learn the relationship between input (our data) and the output.

Unsupervised:
Doesn't need labels


1. General cleaning
2. Removing noise from the dataset
3. Getting the data in right format for the model to understand.

Setting up the environment:

Creating Virtual Environment using conda (an environment and package manager).
1. Open Anaconda Prompt.
2. use this command:
    conda create --name env_name python==python version
3. Activate the environment:
    conda activate env_name

pip: Python's built-in package installer
pip install requirements.txt

python -m spacy download en_core_web_sm

python -m ipykernel install --user --name=env_name

Open Anaconda Navigator.
Select your kernel.
Install Jupyter Notebook.
Launch your notebook.

What does each package do?

nltk (3.9.1) – The Natural Language Toolkit, one of the oldest and most widely used NLP libraries. It includes tools for breaking text into words or sentences (tokenizers), simplifying words to their base form (stemmers, lemmatizers), and accessing large text collections and linguistic datasets. Great for learning and experimenting with NLP basics.

pandas (2.2.3) – Provides the DataFrame structure, which makes it easy to load, clean, and organize data in rows and columns (similar to Excel, but much more powerful). You’ll use it to manipulate text datasets and combine them with other information.

matplotlib (3.10.0) – The fundamental Python plotting library. It lets you create line charts, bar graphs, scatter plots, and more. Think of it as the "drawing canvas" for your data visualizations.

seaborn (0.13.2) – Built on top of matplotlib, but with easier functions and beautiful default styles. It’s especially good for statistical plots, like showing correlations between variables or distributions of data.

scikit-learn (1.6.0) – A general-purpose machine learning toolkit. It provides algorithms for classification, regression, clustering, feature extraction, and model evaluation. It’s often used for building traditional ML models before moving on to deep learning.

spaCy (3.8.3) – A modern NLP library designed for speed and production use. It handles advanced tasks like part-of-speech tagging (identifying nouns/verbs), named entity recognition (detecting people, places, organizations), and syntactic parsing. It’s faster and more practical than NLTK for large-scale projects.

TextBlob (0.18.0.post0) – A beginner-friendly NLP library that wraps around NLTK and other tools. It makes common tasks like sentiment analysis, phrase extraction, and translation very simple with just a few lines of code.

VADER Sentiment (3.3.2) – A lightweight, rule-based tool for sentiment analysis, tuned for short, casual texts like tweets, reviews, and comments. It understands things like exclamation marks, capitalization, and even emoji sentiment.

gensim (4.3.3) – A library for topic modeling and working with word embeddings. It’s known for algorithms like Word2Vec (which learns word meanings from context) and LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation) for discovering hidden topics in large text collections.

transformers (4.47.1) – From Hugging Face, this is the go-to library for using state-of-the-art NLP models like BERT, GPT, and other large language models. It makes it easy to load pretrained models for tasks like classification, text generation, and translation.

PyTorch (torch 2.5.1) – A deep learning framework that powers libraries like transformers. It’s used to build and train custom neural networks for NLP and beyond. Many cutting-edge AI models are implemented in PyTorch.

ipywidgets (8.1.5) – Provides interactive controls (like sliders, dropdowns, and buttons) inside Jupyter notebooks. These let you build small UIs that make experiments more visual and hands-on.

NumPy <(2.0.0) – The foundational library for numerical computing in Python. It introduces the powerful ndarray object, which lets you store and process large arrays and matrices of numbers efficiently. NumPy is behind almost every data science or machine learning library — it provides the fast, vectorized math operations that make Python suitable for heavy computations. You’ll use it for tasks like matrix operations, statistical calculations, and data transformations that feed into models or visualizations.


When preparing text for analysis or machine learning, we often perform several cleaning and transformation steps to make the text more uniform and easier to work with. Each step addresses a specific issue in raw text — from removing stopwords and punctuation to turning words into tokens and root forms.

1. Removing Stopwords.
 data['review_no_stopwords'] = data['review_lowercase'].apply(lambda x: ' '.join([word for word \
                                in x.split() if word \
                                not in (en_stopwords)]))
At first, it might look intimidating — but this codeblock is simply doing several small, logical steps one after another. It’s written in one line to be compact, but let’s break it down and explain why each part is there and what it does.

(Note: In Python, a backslash at the end of a line means: “This line of code continues on the next line.” If your line of code is too long, or you want to break it for readability, you can put a \ at the end — and Python will treat the next line as if it’s part of the same command.)

Step 1. Creating a new column

data['review_no_stopwords'] = ...

Here, a new column is being created in the DataFrame called data. In the brackets, we specify the name of that new column, in this case - ['review_no_stopwords']

Everything on the right-hand side will be the result stored in this column. This lets us keep the processed version of the text without overwriting the original one.

Step 2. Selecting the column to transform

data['review_lowercase']

This refers to the existing column that contains the lowercased text we want to process. We start from this column and apply a transformation to each of its entries. As we store the result in a new column data['review_no_stopwords']we make sure we don't modify the content inside ['review_lowercase'].

Step 3. Applying a function to each value

.apply(lambda x: ...)

The "apply" function in pandas runs a given function on every element in a column. Here, that means it processes each text entry one by one.

The "lambda x:" part defines an anonymous function — a short, inline function that doesn’t need a name after it has been used once.
Each x represents a single text value from the column. Here, we name it x because it keeps the code compact but you can replace it with any valid variable name — for example text, review, or even row — and the code will work exactly the same way. x is just a variable name for each value that "apply" sends into the "lambda".

Using a lambda function allows us to describe the transformation directly inside "apply", without defining a separate function elsewhere.

Step 4. Inside the lambda function

This part defines what exactly we want to do to each text entry:

' '.join([word for word in x.split() if word not in (en_stopwords)])

Let’s go through it from the inside out.

1. Splitting the text

x.split()

This turns the text string into a list of individual words. We do this because we can’t check or remove stopwords while the text is one long string — we need to work with separate words. Splitting lets us inspect and filter words individually.

2. The list comprehension

[word for word in x.split() if word not in (en_stopwords)]

This is the heart of the operation.

It builds a new list of words, but only keeps those that are not in the en_stopwords list.

Let’s analyze the structure piece by piece:

word for word in x.split()
This means: go through each word from the list created by x.split(). It’s a loop written in a compact form.

Here, "word" is the loop variable — the name given to each individual element in x.split() as the loop goes through them one by one. But any other name would work equally well.

The only rule: it must be the same name everywhere inside that comprehension — before and after the for.

if word not in (en_stopwords)
This is a filtering condition. It checks every word and only keeps it if it’s not found in the collection of stopwords.
This condition is evaluated for each word one by one.

A list comprehension is just a shortened version of a regular for loop.

If we wrote it in full, it would look like this:

new_list = []
for word in x.split():
    if word not in en_stopwords:
        new_list.append(word)
So, it reads naturally like this in plain English:

“Create a new list of word
for every word in x.split()
if that word is not in en_stopwords.”

The list comprehension is essentially performing two actions at once:

Looping through every word in the text.

Selecting only those that meet the condition (not being a stopword).

The reason we use a list comprehension here is efficiency — it’s faster and more concise than using a traditional for loop with append().
It keeps the logic for looping and filtering in a single readable structure.

3. Joining the filtered words back

' '.join([...])

After filtering, we have a list of the remaining words.
But the column expects text, not a list.
So we join the words back together into one string, with spaces between them.

We use ' '.join() because:

The ' ' before "join" defines what goes between the words — in this case, a single space.

"join" is called on that space string, and the list of words is passed in as an argument.

The result is a single text string, rebuilt from the filtered words.

Step 5. Why this works in one line

Each method and function in this line passes its result directly into the next one.
Here’s the logical chain:

Select the text column.

Apply a function to each entry.

Inside that function:

Split the text into words.

Filter out stopwords using a list comprehension.

Join the remaining words back into a string.

Store the final cleaned text in a new column.

Because every step produces a return value that can be immediately used by the next,
the entire process can be written as a single continuous expression.

In practice, this one-liner is compact but completely logical —
each part is connected by a clear flow of transformation.

Step 6. Key takeaways
"apply" lets you process each value in a column individually.

"lambda" creates a short inline function when defining a separate one isn’t necessary.

"split" prepares the text for word-level processing.

The list comprehension both loops and filters efficiently in one step.

"join" puts the filtered words back together into readable text.

The entire line works as a chain of transformations, passing results from one step to the next.


